oa

fo

Qo
Se
=
al
wv
om
(2)
me}
=
0)
a
3)
m2)
=
jor)
S
aa)
{e)
=
fo}
=
a

3

a

 
Welcome to our Annual
Report for 2016.

For the first time, we have
combined our reports to
customers and stakeholders.
We have also changed our
publication date, so that we can provide more
up-to-date financial information.

 

Having joined Ability on 1 July 2016, 1 spent my
first 3 months getting to know the organisation,
visiting services and speaking to customers and
colleagues. Above all, | was struck by the positivity
and shared values across our services.

At the official opening of Cavell House in Farnham,
in September, | found the four new flats as good
as any | have seen — spacious, accessible and
adapted to support independent living. The
tenants were as impressed with their new homes
as | was and went on to describe how the support
staff listen and act on their wishes, enable
independent living and respect individual choices.

My ambition for Ability in the coming months
and years is to build on our strong foundations.
We will focus on the quality of our services and
ensure that we work together to prioritise the
quality of the customer experience.

Jeff Skipp

Celebrating new
Hillingdon services

 

Quentin (right) pictured with his Support
Worker Johann at the Hayes Park Lodge
lunch party.

Quentin was one of the customers
from our Hillingdon services who
came to our outdoor lunch party

at Hayes Park Lodge in September.
Customers were joined by local staff
and some of our service
commissioners.

We now support 135 people with
mental health needs in the borough,
after winning 3 new support
contracts during 2016.

As anew customer living at Hamlet
Lodge, Quentin said: “I like how Ability
work. Since the service opened
they've been really helpful. Some
people don’t leave you alone, but I’m
independent. Someone comes every
morning for a chat. When it’s Johann,
we have a really good chat and that’s
the important thing.”

  

* ABILITY
~

 

Colin (centre front) celebrates the official opening at The Lodge,
with other customers from our Farnham services.

Re-opening The Lodge in Farnham

Colin welcomed visitors to his home when we held an
official launch event at The Lodge in Farnham. He said:
“It’s like a palace. I’m so happy living here!”

After the Mayor of Waverley, Cllr Chris Storey, declared
The Lodge officially open, customers from all our
Farnham services joined in the fun with staff and local
service commissioners.

Before re-opening the building in April 2016, we spent
6 months converting it into 4 self-contained flats.

3 of them are wheelchair accessible. The Lodge was
formerly a shared house for people with complex
physical and learning disabilities, but local needs had
changed.

Colin and the other new customers at The Lodge are
supported by staff based next door at Cavell House.

 

, £ y
\ ability

 

IN 2016

Award win for the O-Team

Carron Cleversley was delighted to accept two awards
for Ability at the Customer Scrutiny Inspection (CS!)
Awards in Manchester on 27 October.

Carron is a member of the Q-Team — our customer-led
quality auditing team — which won ‘Excellence in
tenant inspection and mystery shopping’ at the
event. Ours was the only entry to make the shortlist,
because the judges were so impressed.

The judges also gave us a highly commended award
for ‘Excellence in communication’ —a category we
hadn't entered — after reading about how we train
staff to use Makaton, following a Q-Team
recommendation.

Carron took the mic to say it was a privilege to be part
of the team. She said she was very happy to be an
Ability customer.

 

Carron shows off the Q-team’s award plaque, with CEO Jeff
Skipp (to her right) and other members of the staff team.
We set high standards for
your home and repairs service

YOUR

 

Nick (left) and Andy (right) are Morgan
Sindall multi-trade operatives.

Meet our new
contractors

Nick and Andy are part of the Morgan
Sindall team that began repairing
our homes in April 2016.

Andy has been working on Ability
homes for about 5 years — because
he worked for Richardsons, then
Mears, before joining Morgan Sindall.

He says: “I know some of the
customers really well and we have
enjoyed getting to know each other
over the 5 years. It’s been great staying
on this contract so long. When | go
out on a job, | do everything | can to
get the repair done and to make sure
it stays fixed.”

Nick is new to Morgan Sindall. He says:
“Each day is different and each job is
different. | really enjoy the variety. It’s
been good getting to know the

customers and hearing their stories.”

The repairs service —
more work needed

In our last report, we said we would
work with our new contractors to
improve our repairs service.
Unfortunately, this hasn't gone as
well as we hoped.

Our CEO Jeff Skipp says: “I know our
repairs service has been causing
customers some frustration. This has
been down to teething problems as
we changed contractors from Mears
to Morgan Sindall. However, this is our
Housing Department’s top priority.

| would like to assure tenants that
we are working with Morgan Sindall
to solve these problems.”

Improving your homes

All our homes meet the government's
Decent Homes Standard. Many also
meet the higher standard we set for
Ability.

Last year, we replaced ageing
kitchens, bathrooms and boilers in
homes that became vacant.

 

Property MOTs

To give ourselves better information,
we started carrying out property
MOTs to check their condition.

By the end of January, our team had
spent 3 days giving properties their
MOT, with help from customers. They
looked at the Titnore Nursery site,

3 sites in Essex and 2 in St Albans.

 

Dan Wrixon from Morgan Sindall carrying out a recent
property MOT in Waltham Abbey. Assisting him is Trina,
whose son John lives at the service.

“Ability

STANDARD

When we changed contractors, we had to make a
fresh start with collecting repairs information. The
figures below only include repairs carried out by
Morgan Sindall.

Meeting our home service offer

Morgan Sindall carried out

repairs for us between 22 April and 30 September
and of customers were happy with
their repair.

of emergency repairs were finished
within our 24-hour target.

of urgent repairs were finished within
7 days (target is 95%).

of routine repairs were finished within
21 days (target is 95% ).

of our homes gained a gas safety
certificate (target is 100%).

Our performance was disappointing because it
dipped as we got settled with our new contractor.
It was much better by the end of the financial year
and we are working to improve it further.

During 2016-17

We will continue to work with Morgan
Sindall to bring the repairs service to a higher
standard.

The Customer Panel is helping us to find new
ways to get customer feedback about repairs.
We will work with Morgan Sindall to get them
to start collecting immediate customer feedback
on their hand-held devices.

We are keeping better records about the
condition of our properties.

Morgan Sindall will start our new planned
replacement programme in February 2017.
It includes:

installing new heating systems

replacing kitchens

replacing the windows and doors at
properties

redecorating the communal areas at

properties and the outside of
and

properties,

carrying out electrical testing at properties.
We aim to let homes quickly and fairly,
to meet government rules on rents and
to offer good tenancy support.

YOUR

Tenancy

 

Tanya (seated) gets advice from her Supported Housing Assistant, Helen Mepham.

More housing support

Tanya, who lives at The Lodge
in Farnham, is really pleased we
met our promise to appoint new
Supported Housing Assistants.

Our 3 Assistants — Hannah-Kate
Lampard, Helen Mepham and
Theresa Dockery — work alongside your Housing Services
Officers to offer more support to
customers who are struggling to
manage their tenancies.

Customers like Tanya are giving
us great feedback about the

service. The 3 staff can help them
get repairs done, sort out their
rent payments, make a Housing
Benefit claim or work out their
finances. They can also refer
them to other agencies if they
need more specialist help.

The Assistants will also hold
general rent and maintenance
surgeries.

Tanya says: “My Supported Housing
Assistant is Helen Mepham. | talk
to her about my service charge

 

and she answers my questions,
explains what it includes and
helps me to understand.

“Helen helped me to set up my
direct debit to pay my rent, which
makes things easy. | see her once
or twice a month, which is good.
| find it really easy to talk to Helen
and ask her questions. | asked
about having pets and now |
have permission to have a bird
and a guinea pig. It’s good to
have her here.”

Anew home for Will

Will moved to Wishbone Way in
September 2016. He says: “I was
living with my parents, but my dad
became ill. Over time | became
my dad’s main carer which was a
lot of responsibility.

“I’m 30 now and wanted my own
space, so | contacted social services
and told them the situation. They
showed me a few places | could
move to and one of those places
was Wishbone Way. | liked it here

because of all the open space.
The flat was really big and looked
quite bare, but | could see how |
could fill it and make it my home.

“tt was very stressful when | first
came here because it was such a
big change, but now I’ve settled
in and | like it. | like my own space
and coming here made me feel

| could be myself. | can make my
own choices about what | do

and when.”

 

By the end of the year,
we housed people
in local authority
areas.

Meeting our
tenancy offer

We continued to let our homes
as fairly as possible.

Working toward
faster lettings

In last year’s report, we promised
to improve our letting times. Over
the year we brought down the time
it takes us to re-let empty homes
to an average of under 17 days.
However, our target was 10 days,
so we still have work to do.

During 2016-17

We recruited a new member of
staff at the start of the current
financial year. Revenue and
Lettings Officer Paul Greenough
is now working to speed up
our lettings.

We will recruit another
3 Supported Housing Assistants
over the year.
We work to make sure your home and neighbourhood
are clean, safe and good places to live, and we promise
to tackle anti-social behaviour.

YOUR NEIGHBOURHOOD AND

 

 

 

a) <a > Gai gia a 2 . ss aa
@a PF) Pr [ a a
@ J

x a ' : had y | | | ss; |

a =

 

 

\

 

Improvement fund award for Genesis House

Customers who live at Genesis
House in Staines, pictured above, are
really pleased with the new garden
furniture and barbecue they gained
in July. The items were chosen by
customers and bought with an
award from our improvement fund,
with the approval of the Customer
Panel.

Ramon said: “We have tables, chairs
and some recliners, which is great for
the summer. We also got a big BBQ,
which we had fun assembling
ourselves. We then hosted a BBQ for
our friends and family. It was a really
good day. The furniture was definitely
money well spent!”

The Panel also awarded funding for:

garden furniture for Elva Court
in Bexhill-on-Sea

benches for each of the 4
communal gardens in Talbot
village in Poole, and

pots, plants and raised beds for an
easy-to-access vegetable patch in
the garden shared by Cavell House
and The Lodge in Farnham.

To be successful, all of these
improvement ideas had to:
benefit customers
have some lasting value (so not
a party or day trip)
cost between £100 and £2,500 in
total, and

not need expensive ongoing
maintenance.

 

an

arenas a a

“We hosted a BBQ for our
friends and family. It was
a really good day. The
furniture was definitely
money well spent!”

 

Raised planters for the
Cavell House garden.

 

New local plans

As we promised last year, we worked
with customers to create local
business plans. These plans will help
us to:
continue assisting people to live
independently
make sure services remain
financially viable
check that services meet local
needs
check the condition of properties
and plan large-scale maintenance
continue to add to customer
satisfaction and wellbeing, and
find ways to grow so that we can
offer more homes and more care
& support.

During the year, we drew up local business plans in 7 areas.
We spoke to 43 tenants and 30 Care & Support customers.
We asked what they thought of our services.

We found that:

of Care & Support customers were
satisfied with the service.

of tenants were happy with their home, and

of tenants were happy with the repairs
service.

Although most people were happy, 6 people told us they
were unhappy with our handling of anti-social behaviour,
so we need to look at this in future.

In some areas, like Swindon, we saw ways to improve our
existing service. In other areas, including West Sussex, we
planned to meet changing local commissioning priorities.

During 2016-17

We are currently using a new priority list to plan
Property MOTs in each area.

We will work with customers to draw up 10 more local
business plans. We aim to cover St Albans, Merton,
Essex and Hillingdon.
10

Our customer engagement and empowerment promises
are about treating you with respect, making services
easy to access, involving customers in our work and
providing a quick and fair complaints system.

 

 

 

Customer Panel Chair Stuart Rees is
pictured talking to Jane Harrison (Chair
of the Ability board) at the AGM.

The Customer Panel —
improving our work

During the year, Chair Stuart Rees
and the rest of the Customer Panel:

checked our services and helped
us improve

scrutinised our Housing and Care
& Support Key Performance
Indicators

chose projects to benefit from the
improvement fund

helped us review our complaints
work

helped us think about
‘co-production’, where customers,
staff, families and neighbours
work together as equals to
provide services, and

decided we should try out a peer
support scheme.

 

YOU

 

   

 

The Q-Team - collecting your feedback

Aroona, James and the rest of our
award-winning customer-led Q-Team
had a very successful year collecting
your feedback and making
recommendations.

In January 2016, they met 3

customers at Cavell House and

16 of the customers we support

in Farnham.

In June 2016, they joined staff for
training in how to talk to people
who have autism or Aspergers.

In the summer, they visited
Fiddlers Green, our registered care
home in Surbiton.

They also went to Hamlet Lodge,
our new mental health move-on
service in Hillingdon.

 

Q-Team members Aroona (in the checked shirt) and James (centre front) pictured with
customers and staff during the Hamlet Lodge visit.

New ways to get
involved

In last year’s report we promised to
find creative new ways for you to get
involved.

We introduced Property MOTs and
got customers to help us check the
condition of their homes.

In the past year, customers have
taken part in recruitment panels —
including helping us to choose our
new Chief Executive. We're now looking for volunteers from every service
to help us recruit local staff.

A better complaints
process

The Customer Panel helped us meet
our promise to simplify the
complaints process.

We now ask staff to resolve
complaints locally when they can
and always to aim for the best outcome possible. We trained staff from
Ability and our repairs contractors,
Morgan Sindall, to make sure they
understand our approach.

This year, frontline staff received 20
complaints. They resolved the majority
within our target of 10 working days.
4 complaints were a bit more serious.
They were all resolved by senior staff,
with 3 meeting our target of 28
working days.

9 out of 10 housing complaints were
about slow repairs. 6 of these were
about repairs started by our old
contractors.

During 2016-17

During the current year, the Customer Panel is
prioritising the repairs service. Morgan Sindall now
come to every Customer Panel meeting.

We are developing a better system for following up
on repairs complaints.

We will carry out more property MOTs.

We will carry out surveys in all our Hillingdon
services in January. We will use different versions
and formats, including Easy Read.

We are improving the way the Housing Team
communicates with customers, with new template
letters and training in plain English.

Support workers are now being trained in working
with people who have autism or Aspergers.

11
We will support your social activities and help you
to work towards your personal goals. We aim for
good results whenever our services are inspected.

YOUR

New services and old

Last year, we faced the challenge of
local authority budget cuts. We also
had to work to keep up our rental
income. But we had a good year
overall.

We continued to support

customers to maintain their
independence. We are proud
that very few customers end
their stay with us negatively.

We won new contracts in
Hampshire and Hillingdon.

We opened new accommodationbased services in Woking and
Farnham.

We were sorry to say goodbye to our
service in West Sussex. Sadly, our
commissioners could no longer
afford to fund people who are not
eligible for social care.

 

B71
W771

rs

Good inspection results

All our services registered with the
Care Quality Commission continued
to be fully compliant.

Last year, our services at Hillingdon,
Slough and Surbiton were rated
‘good’ across the board after visits by
the COC. The reports were positive
about how we promote choice,
dignity and independent living.

A Hillingdon health and social care
professional told the inspectors:

“| would say for the most part the
quality of care is excellent. Between
my visits | have witnessed marked
improvements in service users.”

Local authority review visits also

consistently gave us glowing results.
Yew Tree Lodge was recently judged to
be ‘outstanding’ by Hillingdon Council.

“I would say for the most part the quality of care

is excellent. Between my visits | have witnessed

marked improvements in service users.”

Hillingdon health and social care professional

  
   

Supporting each other

We launched a pilot peer support
service in Hillingdon. Peer support
encourages customers to build
relationships with each other, so
they can share skills and life
experiences.

Staff worked hard to promote the
service. They used social media to set
up links so that customers could
start to organise their own activities
without our support.

Customers are now getting involved
in more social activities, education
and voluntary work.

A customer said: “We think it’s great!
It’s got us out more and helped us
to make new friends. It’s really good
for people who want to mingle and
socialise.”

 

 

Wendy moves
to Rosedene

Wendy moved to our Rosedene service
in March 2016, when she and 2 friends
moved from a group home in Woking.

She says: “It was a big change
coming here. It was hard at the
beginning because | have never lived
independently before. But | got lots
of support to help me when | was
settling in and | still get the support
need.

"It’s still sometimes hard here because
it’s so different. When | find it hard,

| talk to the staff or go and sit in my
own space and read a book. I’m quite
a quiet person and enjoy time on my
own practising my writing or reading
etective books. | really like reading.
Staff come to the library with me so
can choose new detective stories

to read.

“| like everything at Rosedene. My
support worker Kirsty helps me with
all sorts. I’m more independent living
here and Kirsty helps me with that.

| do more of my own cooking, but
still have support when | need it.

My favourite meal to cook is
shepherd's pie.

“Kirsty has a great sense of humour.
you're down and she comes in, she
really builds you up and helps me to
feel positive and laugh. We often
have a good laugh together.”

 

Our gross income for Care & Support
grew by in the year to September
2016 — to a total of :

of our customers were able
to continue living independently.

During 2016-17

We will use our newly formed continuous improvement
group to achieve good or outstanding in all our care &
support services.

We will use our peer support service, Q-Team and
Customer Panel to involve more customers in the
design and delivery of the service we provide.

13
14

We make sure our regulators rate
our services as good or outstanding.

GOVERNANCE AND

 

Board Chair Jane Harrison (centre front) and fellow Board members take part in this year’s strategy day.

Governance matters

Board Chair Jane Harrison says: “It
has been a year of change at Ability.
David Williams left the organisation
after 24 years — the last 14 years as
our Chief Executive. | would like to
thank David on behalf of the Board
for his commitment and dedication
over the years and to wish him every
success for the future.

“We appointed a new Chief Executive,

Jeff Skipp, from 1 July 2016. Jeff has
significant experience in care and
support having been Chief Executive
of Deafblind UK and prior to this

Director of Care and Support at
The Papworth Trust.

“The Board remains committed to
continuing as an independent
organisation that provides homes
for people who wish to live more
independently. To ensure the success
of this decision in a difficult
economic climate, we will need to
look at new ways of working, making
sure we are as efficient and effective
as possible, whilst ensuring our
customers remain central to
everything we do.”

The financial year

Donna Marshall, Finance Director
and Company Secretary, says: “We
had a steady year, with our turnover
increasing compared to the year
before. Our operating surplus also
rose as a percentage of turnover,
from 7.6% the previous year to 9.5%.”

“customers remain central
to everything we do.”

Jane Harrison, Board Chair

Average spent on responsive
repairs to each home
(£840 the previous year).

Average on planned
maintenance to each home
(£551 the previous year).

Spent on development and
improvements to existing

homes (for example, new
kitchens and bathrooms).

Turnover at year end
(£9.2m the previous year).

Housing-related costs
(£7.9m the previous year).

Operating surplus
(£1.17m the previous year).

Value for money savings

In line with the promises we made last year, we became
more efficient and reduced our costs during 2015-16 by:

raising our operating surplus as a percentage
of turnover to 9.5%, at a time of increased cost
pressures

reducing our overhead costs from 12% of turnover
the previous year to 9% — so that we can continue
to improve and develop homes

retendering our repairs contract, which should give
us annual savings of 10%

completing the sale of a hostel and a shared flat we
no longer needed, to raise funds for investment

comparing ourselves to other similar organisations —
the data went to the Board.

We involved customers in our value for money work, by
getting them to define what the term meant to them
in addition to saving money. Customers also helped us
with the retendering of the repairs contract, by helping
us think about the service they expected and the cost.

During 2016-17

We will survey our care & support customers early
in 2017 - we will report back on the findings later
in the year.

We will hold an official opening for Wishbone Way
in Woking in the summer.

We will open a new service at Whitley Rise.
We will become more efficient and give better value
for money, by:
joining a benchmarking group of similar landlords
to improve comparison data
holding central costs to 9% of turnover

working to speed up letting times so that we lose
less rent because homes are empty, and

drawing up a new asset management strategy to
make sure we are making the most of our stock.

15
Board members
at 30 September 2016

Jane Harrison (Chair)
John Daley

Wendy Crichlow
lan Lines

Nicola Philip
Adrian Polisano
Wala om VAN oiag
alarm Uae s
Karen Hillhouse
Sally Reay

Executive directors
Jeff Skipp
BYola eMC Teter

Auditors:
BYo [fai cela

EET eH

rear OLtilecn

Gig p saan

Finance Director and Company Secretary

Grant Thornton UK LLP
Devonshires

cE IC@E Nasr lta dae

The Coach House, Gresham Road, Staines, Middlesex TW18 2AE

Company Number:
Charity Number:

1261380
271547

Registered with the Homes and Communities Agency, Number LH 2174

We always like to hear from our customers, please get in touch...

a

0844 257 8118

Ability Housing Association
The Coach House, Gresham Road
Staines, Middlesex TW18 2AE

 

Sas 9

window @ability-housing.co.uk

facebook.

Ability Housing
Association

www.ability-housing.co.uk

 

(Sav 4 4-1 2

 

 

 

yas anLY

Ability
The Coach House
Gresham Road
Staines

Middlesex
‘TW18 2AE

 

TST
ability_pictures
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

Registered Company No 1261380

 

 

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statemenis

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Company registration number 1261380

Homes & Communities Agency LH2174
registration number:

Charity number: 271547

Registered office and principal The Coach House

address: Gresham Road
Staines
TW18 2AE

Board: John Daley (resigned 23.03.2016)
Wendy Crichlow

Adrian Polisano
Vince Mewett

Jane Harrison (Chair)
Jane Minter

Karen Hillhouse

lan Lines

Sally Reay

Nicola Philp

Chief Executive David Williams BSc (resigned 30.04.2016)
Jeff Skipp (appointed 01.07.2016)

Finance Director & Secretary Donna Marshall BA ACA

Operations Director Tim Hall

Bankers: Barclays
4 Churchill Place
London
E14 8HP

Solicitors: Devonshires
Salisbury House
London
EC2M 5QY

Auditors: Grant Thornton UK LLP
Registered Auditors
Chartered Accountants
202 Silbury Boulevard
Central Milton Keynes
MK9 1LW

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

INDEX

Report of the Board

Operating and financial review and strategic report
Independent auditor's report

Statement of comprehensive income

Statement of changes in reserves

Statement of financial position

Statement of cash flows

Notes to the financial statements

PAGE

17

19

20

21

22

23

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Report of the Board

The board presents its report and audited financial statements of Ability Housing Association (‘The
association’) for the year ended 30 September 2016.

These have been drawn up under United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice, including
FRS102 (‘the financial reporting standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland’). The association is
registered under the Companies Act 2006 as a company limited by guarantee. It is registered with both the
Charity Commission and the Homes and Communities Agency as a Registered Provider.

Principal activities and public benefit
The association’s principal activities are the provision, by construction or conversion, and the management
of housing for people with disabilities and others in housing need.

The association is classed as a public benefit entity. The board confirms that it has referred to the guidance
contained in the Charity Commission’s general guidance on public benefit when reviewing the association's
aims and objectives and in formulating future plans.

Business review and future development
Details of the association's performance for the year and future plans are set out in the Operating and
Financial Review that follows this board report.

Reserves
After transfer of the surplus for the year of £ 4,357,346 (2015: £735,946), at the year-end reserves
amounted to £16,776,117 (2015: £12,418,771).

Employees

The association is accredited as an Investor in People and has established an Information & Consultation
Committee of elected staff representatives, who meet periodically with executive directors to discuss
issues relevant to employment. Salary levels are set in relation to the market and meet the requirements of
the National Minimum Wage.

We are committed to equality of opportunity for all employees. We have a diverse workforce and have in
place systems for monitoring the effectiveness of our diversity & inclusion policies.

The association shares information on its objectives, progress and activities through the staff intranet,
regular office and departmental meetings.

Health and safety

The board is aware of its responsibilities on all matters relating to health and safety. The association has
employed an external advisor to prepare detailed health and safety policies, ongoing support and provides
staff training and education on health and safety matters.

Board members and executive directors

The present board members and the executive directors of the association are set out on page 1. The
board members are drawn from a wide background bringing together professional, commercial and local
experience.

The executive directors are the chief executive and the other members of the association's senior
management team. They hold no interest in the association’s shares and act as executives within the
authority delegated by the board.

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

Board members and executive directors (continued)
Insurance policies indemnify board members and officers against liability when acting for the association.

Service contracts
The executive directors are employed on the same terms as other staff, their notice periods being three
months.

Pensions

Two executive directors are members of the Social Housing Pension Scheme, a defined benefit final salary
pension scheme. They participate in the scheme on the same terms as all other eligible staff. The
Association contributes to the scheme on behalf of its eligible employees and offers a defined contribution
scheme to all staff.

NHF Code of Governance

We are pleased to report that the association complies with the principal recommendations of the NHF
Code of Governance (revised 2015) with the exception that terms of office may be extended by consent of
the Board.

At last year’s Annual General Meeting held on 23 March 2016, Jane Harrison was re-elected as Chair.
John Daley stood down from the Board.

Tenant involvement

We actively encourage tenants’ involvement in decision-making by promoting tenant participation; up to
one-third of ordinary members may be tenants or service users, A customer panel and customer services
committee have been established to report to the Board and a customer engagement co-ordinator
appointed.

Complaints
Our clear and simple complaints policy is issued to all customers. During the year we received two
complaints that reached level 2 (formal resolution) both of which have been resolved.

Internal controls assurance
The board acknowledges its overall responsibility for establishing and maintaining the whole system of
internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness.

The system of internal control is designed to manage, rather than eliminate, the risk of failure to achieve
business objectives, and to provide reasonable, and not absolute, assurance against material
misstatement or loss.

The process for identifying, evaluating and managing the significant risks faced by the association is
continuing, and has been in place throughout the period commencing 1 October 2015 up to the date of
approval of the annual report and financial statements. The board receives and considers reports from
management on these risk management and control arrangements at each meeting during the year.

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

Internal controls assurance
Key elements of the control framework include:

+ board approved terms of reference and delegated authorities for finance, audit and risk, human
resources and customer services committees;

« clearly defined management responsibilities for the identification, evaluation and control of significant

risks;

robust strategic and business planning processes;

biannual review of the risk map by the board;

detailed financial budgets and forecasts for subsequent years;

formal recruitment, retention, training and development policies;

established authorisation and appraisal procedures for all significant new initiatives and

commitments;

« regular reporting by senior management to the appropriate committee of key business objectives,
targets and outcomes;

* board approved whistleblowing and anti-theft and corruption policies; and

* detailed policies and procedures in each area of the association's work.

eee ee

The board cannot delegate ultimate responsibility for the system of internal control, but it can, and has,
delegated authority to the Finance, Audit & Risk committee to review the effectiveness of the system of
internal control on a regular basis. The board receives reports from the committee together with minutes
of meetings.

The means by which the Finance Audit & Risk committee reviews the effectiveness of the system of
internal control include considering risk reports, internal audit reports, management assurances, the
external audit key issues memorandum and specialist reviews on areas such as support service
contracts, health and safety, housing services and property development. The committee has received
reports from the internal auditor, and has reported its findings to the board. The Board has received the
chief executive’s annual review of the effectiveness of the system of internal control for the association
and in turn conducted its own annual review of the effectiveness of the system of internal control.

A fraud register is maintained and is reviewed by the finance, audit and risk committee on a six
monthly basis.

The board is therefore satisfied that the systems of internal control are sufficiently robust and have
been operating throughout the year.

The report of the board was approved by the board on 15” March 2017 and signed on its behalf by:

WOOO Slee, Dor no. MoKholh

Jane Harrison Sally Reay Donna Marshall
Chairman Board Member Secretary

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Operating and Financial Review and Strategic Report

Activities

Ability Housing Association is a Registered Provider (RP) and a registered charity that specialises in
providing people with housing and support services tailored to their individual needs to enable them to
live more independent lives. These services include the provision of affordable, high quality
accommodation for rent and shared ownership, including supported housing, floating support services,
disability housing registers and adaptations services.

Ability aims to work strategically with local authorities and other Registered Providers in the South of
England to help meet the local needs of disabled people, where Ability's expertise can assist with
promoting independent living. Our pursuit of this aim is underpinned by the following values:

We focus on ability not disability
- we focus on what each person can do rather than what they cannot do. We work together with our
customers to help them overcome barriers to their own personal independent living goals.

We engage actively for feedback
— we engage actively with our customers, colleagues and partners to seek feedback that helps us to
understand how we can improve what we do and how we do it.

We value differences
~ we respect and value the individuality of each person; we believe that differences are strengths and that
diversity enriches our lives and communities.

We demonstrate integrity
— we encourage a culture of openness, honesty and personal accountability; we respond to a challenge
by asking ourselves what we can do to help and always delivering on our promises.

We commit ourselves to:

e listening in order to gain the best possible understanding

e focussing on what is possible and thinking about what we can do
« working to agree a positive outcome without excuse or blame and
e — taking full responsibility to ensure the agreed outcome is achieved.

The registered office is based in Staines and our properties are primarily located in the south-east of
England.

External influences

Nationally the level of Government subsidy for Social Care activities will diminish substantially over the
next few years and the wider reforms to the benefits system will also have an impact. Within this
climate, combined with the impact of decreasing rents, opportunities to develop new supported
housing will be constrained by uncertainty about the availability of revenue funding.

Existing services have and will continue to come under pressure as administrative authorities seek
cost savings. Services provided will need to demonstrate quality, value for money and strategic
relevance. As a result we will need to identify further efficiency savings in order to maintain operating
margins and ensure service viability.

Housing associations are also expected to contribute to improved efficiency and value for money within
the sector, and we are therefore faced with the challenging objectives of improving efficiency and quality
of services within increasingly constrained resources.

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

External influences (continued)

We have been monitoring the effects of welfare reform, so far the impact has been minimal as many of
our customers live in exempt accommodation or are in receipt of discretionary housing payments. We will
continue to keep the position under review.

Strategic Report

Objectives and strategy

The association’s objectives and strategy are set out in a five year business plan that is updated,
teviewed and approved by the board each year. The key objectives underpinning the 2015-2020 plan
are summarised as follows:

* To invest in increasing the supply of supported living in our core areas

= To review our existing housing assets to ensure these are applied wherever possible for a
supported living purpose

= To invest in our homes to ensure these meet our Ability Home Standard, are sustainable for the
long term and offer value for money

« To optimise housing revenue to provide a more localised and responsive Intensive Housing
Management service

"To establish a sustainable model of supported living that matches the aspirations of our
customers and is affordable to commissioners and purchasers of services

By 2020 our targets are to have:

= 750 homes in management, of which at least:

* 90% will be owned by Ability Housing Association (up from 84%)
= 90% will be in core areas, where Ability Care & Support operates
= 75% will provide Supported Living

Performance and development

The key indicators used by senior management and the board to monitor achievement of the
association's objectives are set out below. The board agrees targets each year that are designed to
manage development and deliver continuous service improvement.

 

 

 

 

 

Objective Indicator

Finance e achieve planned operating « results compared to budget

surplus ¢ performance against loan
_ ¢ meet lenders’ covenants covenants

Development e achieve 750 decent, self * new units into management
contained homes by 2020

Environment e achieve average SAP ratings of | * results compared to target
at least 82

Asset management | e reduction in the proportion of e number of shared units

shared housing

 

 

 

Customer service ¢ — continuous improvement in e rent losses from voids/bad debts
standards of customer service e rent arrears
° repair response times
* _ tenant satisfaction
Value for money e achieve reductions in overhead |e revised and updated VFM
(VFM) costs strategy
e — identify the true costs of e¢ benchmarked performance
services provided indicators
e — assess the social impact of e identify service improvements
services delivered e customer consultation

 

 

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Performance and development (continued)

Performance against the key indicators for the financial year ended 30" September 2016 is set out
below.

Finance

Turnover from rents and service charges has increased by £379,293. The increase arises from the
addition of a net total of 15 housing units during the year. Additional Social Care contract income arising
from successful tenders amounted to £471,996. Total operating costs of lettings activity have increased
by £854,098 reflecting the increased pension provision required under IFRS102..

The operating surplus for the year was £1,244,439, compared to a budgeted surplus of £1,269,972. This
is consistent with forecast expectations and the business plan.

Other income and expenditure activities resulted in a net cost of £41,549 (2015: £119,935). This is in line
with expectations and is attributable to development activities. Management services and sundry items
contributed a surplus of £14,381 (2015: £48,499).

Cash balances have increased during the year from £706,529 to £5,599,973. This arose from the sale
proceeds of Layton House, sold in October 2015. Performance monitoring against our loan covenants
has been undertaken with all requirements met under UK GAAP. Any revisions to requirements following
the introduction of IFRS102 have yet to be negotiated with our funders

Our development position at the year end is summarised as:

« The capital development programme is temporarily on hold in the light of uncertainty over future rents
and funding.

* The number of owned self-contained and decent homes in management has increased to 585 from
570 exceeding the annual target for 2016 of 82%.
The total number of homes in management has increased to 724 from 709, meeting the annual target
of greater than 720.

Environment
* The average SAP (energy efficiency) rating of our housing stock has remained at 85 (2015: 85),
exceeding an original target of 82.

Asset management

e All homes met the decent homes standard by 31° March 2010; a programme of further investment is
underway to ensure all homes meet the enhanced Ability standard.

¢ The number of shared housing units in management has remained at 61 (8%). Further remodelling or
disposal of owned units is planned under the asset management strategy.

Customer service
Our performance is summarised below.

Rent losses from voids and bad debts

e Rent loss due to lettable voids has remained consistent with 2015 at 3.8%,compared with a target of
2%,

* Acomprehensive review of the bad debt provision was undertaken, full provision has been made for
gross former tenant arrears, excluding credit balances of an additional £90,406

Rent arrears
e Rent arrears have decreased to 4.6% from 5.05% in 2015 against a target of 3.5%, largely a result of
outstanding benefit claims and benefit cycle position at the year end.

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Value for Money (VFM)

 

Following the development of our VFM strategy we have taken a number of actions to deliver the plan
and to meet the regulatory standard. A revised strategy was agreed for the forthcoming financial year
The table below outlines the principal actions from the strategy and progress to date. The detailed VFM
self assessment report can be found on the website www. ability-housing.co.uk.

 

Action from Strategy

Progress to date

Next steps

 

Active Asset Management
Strategy, replace, repurpose or
dispose of low demand / high
voids shared supported
housing schemes

Disposal of redundant hostel in
Wimbledon — completed October
2015.

Low demand hostel in
Oxfordshire — remodelled for high
care group. Void cover
agreement with local authority.
Now fully let.

Completion of remodelled
Residential care home in
Farnham to deliver four seif
contained units of supported
housing.

Shared flat in Dorking — sale
completed for £222,000.

Development of new asset
management strategy.

Identify next quartile of poor
performing stock.

 

 

Quarterly VFM reports

 

Quarterly drafts produced and
agreed by the Board.

Updated and revised VFM
strategy approved at September
2015 Board meeting.

Publication of performance
report and trends.

New strategy planned for 20161y;

performance targets fed into
2016-17 plans.

VFM impact assessment
undertaken and included in
minuted management team
and board decisions.

 

 

Quarterly performance reports
issued to Board

 

September Quarter produced for
senior management team and
board with comparative data,
shows a decrease in rates and
cost per unit despite inflation. The
report also shows the housing
unit cost reduction target not met.

 

Identify revised peer
comparison group.

Consider joining benchmarking
group.

 

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

Action from Strategy

Progress to date

Next steps

 

Identify costs of service delivery

Service delivery costs identified
and compared with local authority
framework rates where possible.

Individual management accounts
produced per support service.

Successful inclusion on
frameworks and winning tenders
indicates that prices are in line
with authority expectations.

Form a strategic cost reduction
plan. Undertake project on
alternative service delivery
methods. Review overhead
apportionment.

Devise and implement exit
strategies where services found
to be unviable.

 

 

Identify cost reduction targets

 

Report on performance against
the 15-16 budgets of cost per unit
/ hour targets on housing (10%)
and support (1%). Management
cost per unit of £1,200 exceeded
target of £1,150.

Direct support costs pre central
attribution at 87%.

Central overheads reduced to
9.3% of turnover from 12%.

Monitor cost trends. Process
continues into 2016-17 budget
year.

2016-17 target cost reduction
of 5% overall.

 

Gather benchmarking data from
selected peer group and
compare costs / outcomes.

Data from published sources

Data obtained on support service
costs and local authority
expectations. Tendering price
matrices used where available.
Tendering results suggest we are
at the market rate for the services
provided. Hourly support average
costs have been reduced by 2%
in 2016-17.

 

Benchmarking targets written
into 2016-17 objectives.

Further data on types of
support service, housing and
development. Further cost
reduction exercises built into
2016-17 updated VFM strategy.

Individual service cost
reduction targets set as part of
16-17 budgeting process.

 

 

Assess & evaluate social and
environmental impact of
business activities

 

Support outcomes recorded.

Social impact data being
gathered. Comparative costs of
long term residential care /

 

Further assessment across all
activities including energy
efficiency, social inclusion.

 

10

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Roport and Financial Statements.

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

Action from Strategy

Progress to date

Next steps

 

hospitalisation vs cost of tenancy
support. For example care fees
approximately £1,000 per week
per person vs 24/7 support
costing under £600 for
comparable numbers of
customers.

Research data via the DCLG
benefits tool suggests that for
each £1 invested in supported
living saves £3.29 in health and
other social benefit costs.

Raise profile of services
provided, education and
lobbying at government level.

Quantify and publish savings
achieved by our services.

 

 

Review social benefits of
services and investments

 

Social impact data being
gathered. Participation in
community and social activity by
supported customers, including
attending concerts and
participation in sport.

Assess preventive aspects of
housing support — e.g.
enhanced quality of life vs cost
of residential care /
hospitalisation. Assess and
publish social benefits of high
standard housing.

 

Evaluate impact of higher levels
of investment in property

Energy efficiency

- Responsive repairs cost
and number
- Customer satisfaction

Customer feedback sought.

OJEU procurement process in
respect of the new repairs
contract. Awarded from April
2016, with expected annual
savings of 10%.

Scrutiny panel reports on repairs
& voids.

Comparison of data on repairs
undertaken, energy ratings.

Contract cost and performance
monitoring.

 

Provide VFM training to
colleagues and Customer panei
members

Standing agenda item at
customer panel (CP) meetings.

Research options available.
Develop in house training
resource. Encourage
attendance at suitable
seminars / courses.

 

 

Involve customer panel in VFM
consultation

 

VFM issues discussed at CP
meeting. Members invited to
define their idea of VFM.
Opinions sought on cost and
service levels of repairs, rents
and service charges. Energy

 

Ongoing outcomes report to
board and committees.

Production & monitoring of
associated action plan.

 

 

i

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

Action from Strategy Progress to date

Next steps

 

contract management so far
saving approximately £15,000 per

 

 

year.

Include on Customer Service Customer scrutiny roadmap CS meetings to consider

Committee agendas developed and project on voids feedback on VFM from
undertaken. customer panel.Data analysis

Customer panel met with repairs
contractor. Panel input into rent
setting policy.

Tenant/ customer surveys.

and feedback action plans.

 

Reduce central overheads Review of business staffing
requirements undertaken with two
posts disestablished and external
communications outsourced. Net
saving of approximately £40k p.a.

 

Data gathering from activities
above.

 

 

Build savings into 2016-17 Included in 2017 budget setting
budget process. Target of £50,000 p.a.
savings.

 

Working groups devised local
business plans.

Employment costs held to
current levels. Central cost
budget held to 9% of turnover.

 

12

 

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Risks and uncertainties

The main risks that may prevent the association achieving its objectives are considered and reviewed six
monthly by the senior management team and board as part of the corporate planning processes. The
risks are recorded and assessed in terms of their impact and probability. Major risks, presenting the
greatest threats to the association, are reported to the board six monthly together with action taken to
manage the risks and the outcome of the action. These risk reports include assessments of key controls
used to manage the risks. The association has identified the major risks to achievement of its objectives
and these are considered below.

 
   

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

ependency entification of other funding sources, pl
on social care | and other business opportunities. Finance
& revenue Maximise efficiency of delivery.
contracts Increase housing stock to reduce proportion of turnover
that is dependent upon short-term contracts. Marketing of

a nuu.ousing+ support as single entity. seyestenmnemccsrnts , easton
Change in Accept the risk and monitor policy trends. Development
government / | Build flexibility into plans. Customer services
regulatory Assessment of financial impact.

policy Stress testing of business plans.
Corporate Proactive relationship and communications strategy. Asset management
Operations Evaluation of investment & business options. Development

| Contract management. i

Operating Reduce the risk by maintaining financial plan minimum. ‘Development
surplus Seek out new business opportunities meeting strategic Finance
deterioration criteria. a — annie

Loan Funding Implementation of interest rate & treasury ‘strategy. Finance

: _ Monitoring of covenants. __ _| Development
Property Evaluation of development opportunities for sustainability. Development
Development Assessment of opportunities to maximise capacity in light of | Finance

__.__| declining grant and rentalincomerates.

Financial position
The association's statement of comprehensive income and financial position are summarised in Table 1
(page 15) and the following paragraphs highlight key features at 30 September 2016.

Accounting policies
The association’s principal accounting policies are set out on pages 22 to 26 of the financial statements.

The policies that are most critical to the financial results relate to accounting for housing properties and
include deduction of capital grant from the cost of assets and housing property depreciation.

Housing properties

At 30 September 2016 the association owned 602 housing properties (2015: 587). The properties were
carried in the statement of financial position at cost (after depreciation) of £57,232,557(2015:
£57,747,876).

Our investment in housing properties this year was funded through a mixture of social housing grant, loan

funding and cash resources where we continue to show a strong current asset balance, an important
indicator of liquidity.

13

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Pension costs

The association participates in four pension schemes, the Social Housing Pension Scheme (SHPS), the
Surrey County scheme (LGPS), the Social Housing growth plan and the Social Housing direct
contribution plan which was used as the auto enrolment vehicle from May 2014. The former two are final
salary schemes, the others money purchase. The group has contributed to the schemes in accordance
with levels, set by the actuaries, of between 1% and 21%.

The last actuarial valuation of the SHPS was at 30 September 2014. The past service funding level has
been assessed at 70%. We anticipate that our contributions to the scheme will increase beyond 16% of
pensionable salaries in accordance with the pension trustees’ recovery plan. We will continue to
contribute to the scheme in line with the advice of independent actuaries.

The Association has no liability for past service deficit contributions.

Capital structure and treasury policy

By the year end borrowings amounted to £12.15m of which £2.6m falls due to be paid within the next year
as shown below. £2.5m of this is a short term facility expiring in May 2017. Negotiations are in progress
for the refinancing or repayment of this debt.

Maturity 2016 2015

£ £
Within one year 2,634,767 122,815
Between one and two years 122,353 2,622,815
Between two and five years 367,059 868,445
After five years 9,025,724 8,670,594

12,149,903 12,284,669

The association borrows, principally from banks, at both fixed and floating rates of interest. At the
year-end, 48% of the association’s borrowings were at fixed rates (2015: 56%).

The fixed rates of interest range from 1.765% to 10.68% and in the current market, where long term
fixed rates have fallen to around 4%. This means that the association is paying interest on part of its
borrowing at rates substantially in excess of market levels. The amounts are small however and at
present the breakage costs exceed the likely benefits. The situation is reviewed regularly. The
association borrows and lends only in sterling and so is not exposed to currency risk.

The trend information in Table 1 (page 15) shows that gearing, calculated as total loans as a percentage
of capital grants and reserves, has remained stable, decreasing slightly from this year from 23.8% to
21.5%.

Cash flows

Cash inflows and outflows during the year are shown in the statement of cash flow (page 22). The
cash inflow from operating activities decreased this year to £941,852 (2015: £1,541,255), reflecting
changes to working capital. Overall cash balances increased to £5,599,973 (2015 £706,529 reflecting
proceeds of asset sales, cash used for property construction and operating surplus

Future developments

A key influence on the timing of borrowings is the rate at which development activity takes place. The
board has approved plans to spend approximately £4 million during the next three years to develop
housing accommodation; plans have been temporarily halted pending the continued uncertainty over
revenue streams and funding. We have undrawn facilities of £2.5 million (2015: £2.5million).

Statement of compliance
In preparing this Operating and Financial Review, the board has followed the principles set out in the
SORP 2014.

The Board also confirms compliance with the HCA’s Governance and Financial Viability standard.

14

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Table 1 —highlights, five-year summary

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For the year ended 30 September 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012
(restated)*
Statement of Comprehensive
income (£000)
Total turnover 10,099 9,252 8,754 8,732 8,838
Income from lettings 10,038 9,180 8,690 8,679 8,785
Operating surplus 1,244 4,209 851 4,332 1,203
Surplus for the year transferred to 4,357 736 412 894 922
reserves
Balance Sheet (£7000) _ _ _ — |
Housing properties net of 57,232 57,748 21,876 19,790 18,874
depreciation (and grants up to 2014)
Other fixed assets 1,114 1,098 1,135 1,150 4,081
| Fixed assets 58,343 58,846 23,011 20,940 19,955
Net current assets 3,060 170 903 686 756
Total assets less current liabilities 61,404 59,016 23,914 21,626 | 20,711
Loans (due over one year) 9,515 12,163 11,792 9,916 9,532
Other long term liabilities 35,113 34,434 34 34 398
Reserves _: designated - | - - - 1,723
: revenue : - : - 9,058
| : total 16,776 12,419 12,088 11,676 | 10,781
61,404 59,016 23,914 21,626 | 20,711
Accommodation figures ~
Total housing stock owned at year 610 595 566 556 529
end (number of dwellings):
Social housing 602 587 558 548 521
Non-social housing 8 8 8 8 8 |
Statistics
Surplus for the year as % of turnover 12.3 13 4.7 10.2 13.6
Surplus for the year as % of income 12.3 13 4.8 10.3 13.7
from lettings
Rent losses (voids and bad debts as 3.8 3.8 2.47 1.67 1.89
% of rent and service charges
receivable)
Rent arrears (gross arrears as % of 4.5 5.05 4.03 3.6 2,94
rent and service charges receivable)
Interest cover (surplus before interest
payable divided by interest payable) 2.71 2.55 1.96 3.07 3.36
Liquidity (current assets divided by
current liabilities) 1.74 4.12 1.77 1.67 1.65
Gearing (total loans as % of capital 21.5 23.8 23.9 21.0 21.3
| grants plus reserves)
Total reserves per home owned £27,502 £20,871 | £21,741 £21,306 | £20,380

 

 

 

*The 2015 numbers have been updated to reflect the changes as a result of the transition to FRS 102.

15

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Statement of the responsibilities of the board for the report and financial statements
The board is responsible for preparing the report of the Board, operating and financial Review, strategic
report and financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.

Company law requires the board to prepare financial statements for each financial year. Under that law
the directors have elected to prepare the financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom
Accounting Standards (United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice), including FRS 102
‘The financial reporting standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland’. Under company law the
directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and
fair view of the state of affairs and profit or loss of the company. In preparing these financial statements
the directors are required to:

° select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently

. make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent

. state whether applicable United Kingdom Accounting Standards and the Statement of
Recommended Practice (SORP): Accounting by registered housing providers, have been followed,
subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements.

. Prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume
that the company will continue in business

The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and
explain the company’s transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial
position of the company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the
Companies Act 2006. They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the company and hence
for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.

Disclosure of information to auditors
The board members confirm that:
e so far as each director is aware, there is no relevant audit information of which the company’s auditors
are unaware; and
e the directors have taken all steps that they ought to have taken as directors to make themselves
aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the auditors are aware of that information
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information
included on the Company's website. Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and
dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.

Annual general meeting
The annual general meeting will be held on 15" March 2017 at The Thames Club, Staines.

External auditors

Grant Thornton UK LLP, having expressed their willingness to continue in office, will be deemed
appointed for the next financial year in accordance with section 487(2) of the Companies Act 2006
unless the company receives notice under section 488(1) of the Companies Act 20086.

The report of the board was approved by the board on 15" March 2017 and signed on its behalf by:

GORNOMH

Jane Harrison
Chairman

16

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Independent auditor's report to the members of Ability Housing Association

We have audited the financial statements of Ability Housing Association for the year ended 30 September
2016 which comprise the Statement of Comprehensive Income, the Statement of Changes In Reserves
the Statement of Financial Position, the Statement of Cash Flows and the related notes. The financial
reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and United Kingdom
Accounting Standards (United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice), including FRS 102 The
Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland.

This report is made solely to the charitable company’s members, as a body, in accordance with Chapter 3
of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006. Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the
charitable company’s members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditor's report and
for no other purpose. To the fullest extent permitted by law, we do not accept or assume responsibility to
anyone other than the charitable company and the charitable company’s members as a body, for our
audit work, for this report, or for the opinions we have formed.

Respective responsibilities of the board and the auditor

As explained more fully in the Statement of Board's Responsibilities set out on page 16, the board is
responsible for the preparation of the financial statements which give a true and fair view. Our
responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable
law and International Standards on Auditing (UK and Ireland). Those standards require us to comply with
the Auditing Practices Board’s (APB’s) Ethical Standards for Auditors.

Scope of the audit of the financial statements
A description of the scope of an audit of financial statements is provided on the Financial Reporting
Council's website at www.frc.org.uk/auditscopeukprivate.

Opinion on financial statements

In our opinion the financial statements:

e give a true and fair view of the state of the charitable company's affairs as at 30 September 2016
and of its surplus for the year then ended;

° have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting
Practice, the Housing and Regeneration Act 2008 and the Accounting Direction for Private
Registered Providers of Social Housing 2015; and

* have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 20086.

Opinion on other matter prescribed by the Companies Act 2006

In our opinion the information given in the Report of the Board and the Strategic Report and for the
financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements.

17

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Matters on which we are required to report by exception

We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters where the Companies Act 2006 requires us
to report to you if, in our opinion:

¢ adequate accounting records have not been kept, or returns adequate for our audit have not been
received from branches not visited by us; or

e the financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns; or

¢ certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made; or

e we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.

Garcon Thernkgy UK we

Laura Brierley

Senior Statutory Auditor

for and on behalf of Grant Thornton UK LLP
Statutory Auditor, Chartered Accountants
Milton Keynes

Date 3) Wreceln 20)4

18

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Stafemenis

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

Statement of Comprehensive Income Note 2016 2015
£ £
Turnover: continuing activities 3 40,099,082 9,252,390
Operating costs 3 (8,854,643) (8,042,554)
Operating surplus: continuing activities 6 1,244,439 1,209,836
Profit / (Loss) on disposal of property, plant & equipment 7 3,554,064 Interest Receivable 8 18,206
Interest payable and similar charges 9 (459,363) (473,890)
Surplus on ordinary activities before taxation 4,357,346 735,946
Tax on surplus for the year - Surplus and total comprehensive income for the financial year & 357,346 a5 46
Total comprehensive income for the year 4,357,346 735.946

The notes on pages 23 to 49 form part of these financial
statements.

The results relate to continuing activities.

The financial statements were approved by the Board on 15" March 2017

ORO UK Bea, donno Mora hott

Jane Harrison Sally Reay Donna Marshall
Chairman Board Member Secretary
15" March 2017

19

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN RESERVES

Income and Expenditure Reserve

Balance at 1 October

Total comprehensive income for the year

Balance at 30 September

The notes on pages 23 to 49 form part of these financial statements

20

2016
£

12,418,771

4,357,346

16,776,117

2015
£

11,682,825

735,946

12,418,771

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

Company number 1261380
Statement of Financial Position at 30 September 2016

Tangible fixed assets
Housing properties
Other tangible fixed assets

Current assets
Trade and other debtors
Cash and cash equivalents

Creditors: amounts falling due within one year

Net current assets

Total assets less current liabilities

Creditors: amounts falling due after more than one year
Pension provision SHPS

Total Net Assets

Capital and reserves
Income and Expenditure reserve

Total Reserves

The notes on pages 23 to 4g form part of these financial statements

Note

13

15

16

2016

57,232,557
1,111,490

98,344,047

1,594,225
5,599,973

7,194,198

(4,134,108)

3,060,090

61,404,137

44,152,020
476,000

16,776,117

16,776,117

16,776,117

61,404,137

The financial statements were authorised and approved by the Directors on 15" March 2017

BOHOL,

Jane Harrison Sally Reay
Chairman Board Member

21

Donner Marshal

Donna Marshall

Secretary

2015

57,747,876
1,097,746

__ 58,845,622

935,971
706,529

1,642,500

(1,472,782)

169,718

59,015,340

46,278,569
318,000

12,418,771

12,418,771

12,418,771

_59,016,340

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

Statement of Cash Flows Note

Net cash generated from operating activities 21

Cash flow from investing activities

Interest received

Purchase and construction of housing properties
Social housing grant — received

Proceeds from sale of tangible fixed assets
Purchase of other fixed assets

Cash flow from financing activities
Loans received

Repayment of borrowings
Interest paid

Net change in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the
year

Cash and cash equivalents at end of the year

The notes on pages 23 to 49 form part of these financial statements

22

2016

941,852

18,206
(1,100,527)
925,000
4,842,559

(146,517)
4,538,721

(134,766)
(452,363)

(587,129)

4,893,444

706,529

5,599,973

2015
1,541,255

(2,637,222)
4,296,249

(102,835)
(1,443,808)

500,000
(122,816)
(464,890)

(87,706)

9,741

696,788

706,529

 

ee re

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

1. General Information

The association is registered under the Companies Act 2006 as a company limited by guarantee. It is
registered with both the Charity Commission and the Homes and Communities Agency as a Registered
Provider.

2. Accounting policies

Basis of accounting

The financial statements of the association are prepared in accordance with UK Generally Accepted
Accounting Practice (UK GAAP) including Financial Reporting Standard 102 (‘FRS 102’) and the Housing
SORP 2014: Statement of Recommended Practice for Registered Social Housing Providers and comply
with the Accounting Direction for Private Registered Providers of Social Housing 2015.

This is the first year in which the financial statements have been prepared under FRS 102. Refer to note
27 for an explanation of the transition. The financial statements are presented in Sterling (£), the functional
and presentational currency of the association.

Going concern

The association's business activities, its current financial position and factors likely to affect its future
development are set out within the Strategic Report. The association is able to meet its commitments in
respect of long-term debt facilities used to finance reinvestment and development programmes, along with
the association’s day to day operations. The association also has a business plan, which shows that it is
able to service these debt facilities whilst continuing to comply with lenders’ covenants. On this basis, the
board has a reasonable expectation that the association has adequate resources to continue in
operational existence for the foreseeable future, being a period of at least twelve months after the date on
which the report and financial statements are signed. For this reason, it continues to adopt the going
concern basis in the financial statements.

Significant judgements and estimates

Preparation of the financial statements requires management to make significant judgements and
estimates. The items in the financial statements where these judgements and estimates have been made
include:

Supporting people and social care contracts

Management judgement is applied in determining the extent to which the risks and benefits are transferred
to the association when considering the Income to be recognised. £4,878640 (2015 £4,406,644)of
supporting people and social care income was recognised in the year. see note 4 for further details

Estimation uncertainty

Information about estimates and assumptions that have the most significant effect on recognition and
measurement of assets, liabilities, income and expenses is provided below. Actual results may be
substantially different.

Useful lives of depreciable assets

Management reviews its estimate of the useful lives of depreciable assets at each reporting date based on
the expected utility of the assets. Uncertainties in these estimates relate to technological obsolescence
that may change the utility of certain software and IT equipment and changes to Decent Homes Standards
which may require more frequent replacement of key components. Accumulated depreciation at 30
September 2016 was £7,516,761. (2015 £6,788,415).See note 12 for further details

23

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
Defined benefit obligation (DBO)

Management's estimate of the DBO is based on a number of critical underlying assumptions such as
standard rates of inflation, mortality, discount rate and anticipation of future salary increases. Variation
in these assumptions may significantly impact the DBO amount and the annual defined benefit
expenses. The liability at 30 September 2016 was £476,000 (2015 £318,000). See note 20 for further
details

Turnover

Turnover comprises rental income receivable in the year, and other services included at the invoiced value
of goods and services supplied in the year and grants receivable in the year.

Rental income is recognised from the point when properties under development reach practical

completion or otherwise become available for letting, net of any voids. Charges for support services

funded under Supporting People are recognised as they fall due under the contractual arrangements
with Administering Authorities.

Value added tax

The association is not registered for VAT, and therefore all amounts are inclusive of VAT.

Corporation tax

The association is recognised by HMRC as a charity. During the current year the association is claiming
exemptions from corporation tax on its income and gains. All of the association’s income and gains will be
applied to its charitable purposes.

Interest payable

Interest payable is charged to the statement of comprehensive income in the year. No interest is
capitalised.

Financial instruments

Financial instruments which meet the criteria of a basic financial instrument as defined in Section 11 of
FRS 102 are accounted for under an amortised historic cost model.

Debtors

Short term debtors are measured at transaction price, less any impairment. Where deferral of payment
terms have been agreed at below market rate, and where material, the balance is shown at the present
value, discounted at a market rate

Creditors

Short term trade creditors are measured at the transaction price. Other financial liabilities, including bank
loans, are measured at fair value, net of transaction costs.

Employee Benefits

Short-term employee benefits and contributions to defined contribution plans are recognised as an
expense in the period in which they are incurred.

24

 

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Stafeoments

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)

Housing properties

Housing properties are principally properties held for the provision of social housing or otherwise to provide
social benefit and are stated at cost less depreciation. Cost includes the cost of acquiring land and
buildings, and expenditure incurred in respect of improvements.

Works to existing properties are works which replace a component that has been treated separately for

depreciation purposes along with those works which result in an increase in the net rental income, such

as a reduction in future maintenance costs, or result in a significant extension of the useful economic life
of the property in the business are capitalised as improvements.

Shared ownership properties are split proportionally between current and fixed assets based on the element
relating to expected first tranche sales. The first tranche proportion is classed as a current asset and related
sales proceeds included in turnover; and the remaining element is classed as fixed asset and included in
housing properties at cost, less any provisions needed for depreciation or impairment.

Donated land

Land donated by local authorities and others is added to cost at the fair value of the land at the time of the
donation. Where the land is not related to a specific development and is donated by a public body an
amount equivalent to the increase in value between fair value and consideration paid is treated as a non
monetary government grant and recognised as deferred income within liabilities. Where the donation is
from a non-public source, the value of the donation is included as income. The association does not
currently own any donated land.

Government Grants

Government grants include grants receivable from the Homes and Communities Agency (the HCA), local
authorities, and other government organisations. Government grants received for housing properties are
recognised in income over the useful life of the housing property structure (excluding land) under the
accruals model.

Grants relating to revenue are recognised in the statement of comprehensive income over the same period
as the expenditure to which they relate once reasonable assurance has been gained that the entity will
comply with the conditions and that the funds will be received. Grants due from government organisations
or received in advance are included as current assets or liabilities.

Government grants received for housing properties are subordinated to the repayment of loans by
agreement with the HCA. Government grants released on sale of a property may be repayable but are
normally available to be recycled and are credited to a Recycled Capital Grant Fund and included in the
statement of financial position in creditors.

If there is no requirement to recycle or repay the grant on disposal of the asset, any unamortised grant
remaining within creditors is released and recognised as income in income and expenditure.

Where individual components are disposed of and this does not create a relevant event for recycling
purposes, any grant which has been allocated to the component is released to the statement of
comprehensive income. Upon disposal of the associated property, the association is required to recycle
these proceeds and recognise them as a liability.

Other grants

Grants received from non-government sources are recognised using the performance model. A grant
which does not impose specified future performance conditions is recognised as revenue when the grant
proceeds are received or receivable. A grant that imposes specified future performance-related conditions
on the association is recognised only when these conditions are met. A grant received before the revenue
recognition criteria are satisfied is recognised as a liability.

25

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statemenis

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)

Depreciation of housing properties
Freehold land is not depreciated. Properties held on leases are amortised over the life of the lease or
their estimated useful economic lives in the business, if shorter.

The association separately identifies the major components which comprise its housing properties and
charges depreciation so as to write down the cost of each component to its estimated residual value, on a
straight line basis, over its estimated useful economic life.

The association depreciates the major components of its housing properties over the following
timescales:

Structure 100 years
Roof 60 years
Kitchen 20 years
Bathroom 25 years
Boiler 15 years
Heating System 30 years
Windows & Doors 20 years
Electrics 30 years
Impairment

Annually housing properties are assessed for impairment indicators. Where indicators are identified an
assessment for impairment is undertaken comparing the scheme's carrying amount to its recoverable
amount. Where the carrying amount of a scheme is deemed to exceed its recoverable amount, the
scheme is written down to its recoverable amount. The resulting impairment loss is recognised as
operating expenditure. Where a scheme is currently deemed not to be providing service potential to the
association, its recoverable amount is its fair value less costs to sell.

Other tangible fixed assets
Other tangible fixed assets are measured at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated
impairment losses.

Depreciation is provided evenly on the cost of other tangible fixed assets to write them down to their
estimated residual values over their expected useful lives. No depreciation is provided on freehold land.

The principal annual rates used for other assets are:

Freehold offices 1%-2%

Long leasehold property Over life of lease
Furniture, fixtures and fittings 25%

Computers 33.3%

Motor vehicles 25%

Gains or losses arising on the disposal of other tangible fixed assets are determined as the difference
between the disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the assets and are recognised as part of the
surplus/deficit for the year.

26

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)

Leased assets

Leases are classified as finance leases whenever the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the
risks and rewards of ownership of the leased asset to the association. All other leases are classified
as operating leases.

Assets held under finance leases are recognised initially at the fair value of the leased asset (or, if
lower, the present value of minimum lease payments) at the inception of the lease. The corresponding
liability to the lessor is included in the statement of financial position as a finance lease obligation.
Lease payments are apportioned between finance charges and reduction of the lease obligation using
the effective interest method so as to achieve a constant rate of interest on the remaining balance of
the liability. Finance charges are deducted in measuring the surplus or deficit. Assets held under
finance leases are included in tangible fixed assets and depreciated and assessed for impairment
losses in the same way as owned assets.

Rentals payable under operating leases are charged to the statement of comprehensive income on a
straight-line basis over the lease term, unless the rental payments are structured to increase in line
with expected general inflation, in which case the association recognises annual rent expense equal
to amounts owed to the lessor. The aggregate benefit of lease incentives are recognised as a
reduction to the expense recognised over the lease term on a straight line basis.

Properties for sale

Shared ownership first tranche sales, completed properties for outright sale and property under
construction are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value. Cost comprises materials, direct
labour and direct development overheads. Net realisable value is based on estimated sales price after
allowing for all further costs of completion and disposal.

Provisions for liabilities

Provisions are recognised when the association has a present obligation (legal or constructive) as a result
of a past event, it is probable that the association will be required to settle the obligation, and a reliable
estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. The amount recognised as a provision is the best
estimate of the consideration required to settle the present obligation at the end of the reporting period,
taking into account the risks and uncertainties surrounding the obligation.

Where the effect of the time value of money is material, the amount expected to be required to settle the
obligation is recognised at present value using a pre-tax discount rate. The unwinding of the discount is
recognised as finance cost in profit or loss in the period it arises.

The association recognises a provision for annual leave accrued by employees as a result of services
rendered in the current period, and which employees are entitled to carry forward and use within the next
12 months. The provision is measured at the salary cost payable for the period of absence.

27

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION

Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

 

 

3. Particulars of turnover, cost of sales, operating costs and operating surplus
2016
Turnover Operating Operating
costs surplus
£ £ £
Social housing lettings 10,037,910 (8,752,815) 1,285,095
Other social housing activities
Development costs not capitalised - (65,930) (55,930)
Management services 60,279 (45,898) 14,381
Donations 893 - 893
61,172 (101,828) (40,656)
10,099,082 (8,854,643) 1,244,439
2015
Turnover Operating Operating
costs surplus
£ £ £
Social housing lettings 9,179,989 (7,898,717) 1,281,272
Other social housing activities
Development costs not capitalised - (119,935) (119,935)
Management services 72,401 (23,902) 48,499
72,401 (143,837) (71,436)
9,252,390 (8,042,554) 1,209,836

 

 

28

 
 
 

67

 

 

 

 

Gec 98L vl 88L * 798 COL CSO Ve SESSO] PIO,
CZe L8o L S60'S8z'L L82'66 v66'7S6 oze‘zez s6ume| Suisnoy [eloos uo snjdins Bugeiodo,
(212'868'2) (g-e'zsz'8) — (z0s‘€0e) (vo7'ZZ0'Z) (gg9'96z'1) s6ume| Buisnoy jelo0s uo s}soo Buyeiedg
(g6z'8¢9) (oer'sr9) (zoe'9) (e¢¢'g0s) (g6z'0eL) samedoid Buisnoy Jo uoneisaidaq
(00z'0zs) (Zyg'egs) > (tpz'eze) (so9‘0Lz) sableyo esea| Apedolg
- (907'06) - (Ztg'02) (68861) uolslaoid iqep peg
(Z90‘Z9L'y) (ezr'ses'y)  (zo9'9vz) (ggz'gee'y) (020'0SZ) sjsoo poddng 9 a1e9
(sry'9ge) (9LS'¢8s) 7 (Zrb'6ze) (pLe'v0z) suyedei Jofew 2 soueuajuleW peuUeid
(€vz'96¢) (ol¢'vzs) (P2981) (Lr6‘6re) (Ssz‘SSL) aoueua]UleW aulnoY
(z16'€2S) (6g9'z8¢) (LL€'22) (gSz'LLp) (280'r8) SOdINIES
(670'L26) (6SL'206) (Z1L9'p) (v92‘099) (egz'Lre juewebeuey
686'621'6 OL6'ZE0'0L 88z'e0r vry'SoL's SLL'6ZS'L sBume| Bursnoy jeI90s wo 4eAoun |
88Z'ere 8bZ'06L - 8bz'06L - $]ue16 enuendl J8WO
O8L'L8e LZ78'28e 8SZ's LL6°6ze ZSL'7S s]ueJB }UeWLUSA0B pesmoWwYy
gse'sso'y 76e'8so'r sos‘s9e yer l60'r €9r'87z saoimas yoddns 10) sebieyD
699'Z8 €0S'0L8 - 96¢'Z29 ZOL'SEL . @WOOU! Bd1NES
L89'79S'e 9r6'096'E SZ0'6e Sor'Lze'z QSr'OLL'L SEBIEYO SONS SIGEYNUEP! Jo JOU a|qeAIEoel JUeY
3 3 3 3 3
[e}0L 1e}0.L, sSoWoY ae Buisnoy Buisnoy

poyioddns spoou jeioues
Sloe 9102
s6u1}30] Buisnoy Telv0s woijj oanjipuodxs pue swiosdul jo SIB|NI}Ied “yy

(penunuc?) SLNAWSLVLS IVWIONVWNI4 SHL OL SALON

 

910Z Jequiejdes Q¢ papus Jeah ou} JO4

SIUSWIS]EIS [BIQUEULY PUE LOdsy
NOILVIDOSSV ONISNOH ALITIAV
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

5. Accommodation in management and development

At the end of the year accommodation in management for each class of accommodation was as follows:

 

2016 2015
No No
Social housing
General housing 210 213
Supported housing 383 363
Low cost home ownership 2 4
Residential care homes 7 7
Total owned 602 587
Accommodation managed for others 114 114
Total managed 716 701
Non-social housing —
Respite Unit 8 8
Total owned and managed 724 709
Accommodation in development at the year end a 7 16
6. Operating surplus
The operating surplus is arrived at after charging:
2016 2015
£ £

Depreciation of freehold housing properties 497,949 556,454
Depreciation of leasehold housing properties 147,481 147,481
Depreciation of other tangible fixed assets 132,773 139,293
Operating lease rentals
- — Office equipment 1,805 5,324
- land and buildings 609,594 570,200
Auditors’ remuneration
- for audit services 17,900 13,930
- for other services -covenant compliance 770 1 750

30

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statemonis

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

7 Profit / (Loss) on Disposal of fixed assets -—

Disposal proceeds - housing properties
Carrying value- components
Carrying value- housing properties

Capital grant recycled note 17

Profit on disposal

8. Interest receivable and similar income

Interest receivable and similar income

9. Interest payable and similar charges

Loans and bank overdrafts

Unwinding of discount on pension provision

10. Employees

housing properties

2016

£
4,842,559
(13,937)
(889,494)
(385,064)

 

3,554,064

2016

18,206

2016
£
452,363

7,000

 

459,363

2015

2015

2015
£
464,890

9,000

 

473,890

Average monthly number of employees expressed as full time equivalents (calculated based on a standard
working week of 40 hours for care & support staff and 35 hours for others):

Administration
Development
Housing, support and care

31

2016
No

9

112

 

121

2015
No

10
1
110

 

121

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

10. Employees (continued)

The full time equivalent number of staff who received remuneration (including directors):

£60,001-£70,000
£70,001-£80,000
£80,001-£90,000

Employee costs:

Wages and salaries
Social security costs
Other pension costs
Change in pension provision

11. Directors, members and executive directors

Aggregate emoluments of directors (including pension
contributions)
Emoluments of the highest paid director (excluding
pension contributions and including benefits in kind)
Total expenses reimbursed to directors not
chargeable to UK income tax — Board members

— Executives

Executive salary bands

£50,000 - £60,000
£60,000 - £70,000
£70-000-£80,000
£80,000-£90,000

2016
No.
1

1

2016

£
3,607,005
306,136
89,140
151,000
4,153,281

2016
£
208,985

65,000

414
5,074

2016

4
1
1

2015
No.

2015

£
3,355,315
281,803
92,153
(31,000)
3,698,270

2015
£
188,221

100,793

164
2,961

2015

ee es

The Chief Executive is a member of the Social Housing Pension Scheme Growth Plan series 4. He is an
ordinary member of the pension scheme and no enhanced or special terms apply. Pension contributions
totalling £8,405 (2015: £13,032 - £7,602) in respect of Mr Williams and £803 in respect of Mr Skipp were made
during the year. The association does not make any further contribution to an individual pension arrangement

for the Chief Executive.

Board members

None of the board members received emoluments.

32

 

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

 

 

 

 

 

12. Tangible fixed assets - properties
Housing properties Freehold Leasehold Total Housing Completed Total
Social housing housing _ properties shared housing
housing properties properties forletting ownership properties
properties held for held for under housing
held for letting letting construction properties
letting

Cost £ £ £ £ £ £
At 1 October 2015 46,037,940 15,581,216 61,619,156 1,354,766 366,774 63,340,696
Additions 9,641 - 9,641 823,938 - 833,579
Works to existing 253,255 - 253,255 - - 253,255
properties
Shared ownership 352,252 352,252
buy back
Shared ownership 531,182 531,182 (531,182) reclassified
Schemes completed 2,166,247 - 2,166,247 (2,166,247) - Disposals (1,280,731) (67,644) (1,348,375) (12,457) - (1,361,001)
B18 Pm —AT,TAT 584 15,513,572 65.231,106 187,844 63,418,950 _
Depreciation and
impairment
At 1 October 2015 3,986,340 1,606,480 5,592,820 - - 5,592,820
Charged in year 497,949 147,481 645,430 - - 645,430
Released on disposal (51,857) - (51,857) - - (51,857)
beg ae 4,432,432 1,753,901 6,186,393 2 ~ "6,186,393
Net book value
At 30 September 43,284,933 13,759,611 57,044,544 - 187,844 57,232,557
2016 SO al
At 30 September 42,051,600 13,974,736 56,026,336 1,354,766 366,774 57,747,876
2015 eo ee FCO

Tangible fixed assets - properties

Expenditure on works to existing properties

2016 2015

£ £

Components capitalised 253,255 a
Amounts charged to statement of comprehensive income 583,516 386,448
836,771 386,448

33

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Stalemonts

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)
12. Tangible fixed assets — properties (continued)

Social housing assistance

Total accumulated social housing grant received or receivable
at 30 September:

Recognised in the statement of comprehensive income
Held as deferred income

Housing properties book value, net of depreciation

Freehold land and buildings
Long leasehold land and buildings

2016

387,821
34,667,858

2016

£
43,472,946
13,759,611

57,232,557

2015

381,189
34,469,536

2015

£
43,773,140
13,974,736

57,747,876

Annually housing properties are assessed for impairment indicators. Where indicators are identified an
assessment for impairment is undertaken comparing the scheme’s carrying amount to its recoverable

amount. No impairment charges were required for the financial year (2015: £nil). Amounts do not include
capitalised interest, all interest charges are written off to expenditure as incurred. At the year end a total of
212 (2015: 212) properties were subject to charges securing loan funding. Of these 137 (2015:137) secured
the total Barclays facility 59 (2015: 59) the Dexia loan and 16 (2015 ;16) the Crown Mortgage loans.

13. Tangible fixed assets - other

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Vehicles & Furniture,
Freehold office fixtures and
offices equipment fittings Total
£ £
Cost .
At 1 October 2015 1,150,894 829,039 315,408 2,295,341
Additions - 122,361 24,156 146,517
At 30 September 2016 4,150,894 951,400 339,564 2,441,858
Depreciation
At 1 October 2015 188,246 764,215 245,134 1,197,595
Charged in the year 18,704 82,922 31,147 132,773
At 30 September 2016 206,950 847,137 276,281 1,330,368
Net book value
At 30 September 2016 943,944 104,263 63,283 1,111,490
At 30 September 2015 —_ 962,648 64,824 70,274 ___ 1,097,746

34

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financiat Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

14. Debtors

Due within one year
Rent and service charges receivable
Less: provision for bad and doubtful debts

Other debtors
Prepayments and accrued income

15. Creditors: amounts falling due within one year

Debt (note 18)

Trade creditors

Rent and service charges received in advance
Other taxation and social security

Other creditors

Accruals and deferred income
Holiday pay accrual
Deferred grant income

2016

308,652
(99,633)

209,019
715,874
669,332

1,594,225

2016
£

2,634,767
402,933
144,894

89,239
940

456,294
17,219
387,821

4,134,108

16. Creditors: amounts falling due after more than one year

Debt (note 19)

Recycled capital grant fund (note 17)
Deferred grant income (note 18)

35

2015
£
9,515,133

356,850
34,280,037

44,152,020

2015

225,464
(9,227)

216,237
360,970
358,764

935,971

2015
£

122,815
234,636
88,255
81,444
940

539,652
17,219
387,821

1,472,782

2015
£
12,161,854

35,000
34,081,715

46,278,569

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

17. Recycled capital grant fund

At 1 October
Grants recycled
Grant utilised

At 30 September

18. Deferred Grant Income

At 1% October
Disposals

Grant Received
Released to income

At 30! September

Due in one year
Due after one year

19. Debt analysis

Borrowings

Due within one year
Housing loans

Due after more than one year
Housing loans

Total loans

36

2015
£
35,000
385,064
(63,214)

356,850

2016

34,469,536
338,857

925,000
(387,821)

34,667,858

387,821
34,280,037

2016
2,634,767

9,515,136

12,149,903

2015
£
35,000

35,000

2015

33,685,725
1,165,000

1,165,000
(381,189)

34,469,536

387,821
34,081,715

2015
122,815

12,161,854

12,284,669

 

 

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

19. Debt analysis (continued)

Security
Housing loans are secured by fixed charges on individual properties.

Terms of repayment and interest rates

The loans are repaid in monthly, quarterly or half yearly instalments over the agreed period of the loan. The
final instalments fall to be repaid in the period 2017 to 2037. Interest rates on borrowings range from 0.91% to
10.688%,

 

At 30 September the association had undrawn loan facilities of £2.5 m (2015: £2.5m).

 

Based on the lender's earliest repayment date, borrowings are repayable as follows:
2016 2015
£ £
Within one year or on demand 2,634,767 122,815
One year or more but less than two years 122,353 2,622,815
Two years or more but less than five years 367,059 868,445
Five years or more 9,025,724 8,670,594
12,149,903 12,284,669
The prior year comparatives have been restated to reflect more
appropriately the ageing of the debt
20. Pension :
Pension Provision
2016 2015
£ £
At 1% October 318,000 340,000
Remeasurement 158,000 (31,000)
At 30% September 476,000 318,000
The SHPS obligation is referred to in note 19. The provision is based on the net present value of
payments agreed at the year end. The provision will be adjusted following the triennial valuations in the
pension scheme, either increasing or decreasing the provision with the opposite entry being shown as |
operating costs within income and expenditure. The unwinding of the discount is shown as a finance
cost.

 

37

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

20. Pension (continued)

The association participates in two funded multi-employer defined benefit schemes, the Social Housing
Pension Scheme (SHPS) and the Local Government pension scheme under a TUPE transfer agreement and
one multi employer defined contribution scheme.

For each of the schemes, it has not been possible to identify the share of underlying assets and liabilities
belonging to individual participating employers. The statement of comprehensive income charge represents
the employer contribution payable to the scheme for the accounting period.

Contributions payable from the association to the SHPS under the terms of its funding agreement for past
deficits are recognised as a liability within other provisions in the association's financial statements.

Social Housing Pension Scheme

Ability Housing Association participates in the scheme, a multi-employer scheme which provides benefits to
some 500 non-associated employers. The scheme is a defined benefit scheme in the UK. It is not possible
for the company to obtain sufficient information to enable it to account for the scheme as a defined benefit
scheme. Therefore it accounts for the scheme as a defined contribution scheme.

The scheme is subject to the funding legislation outlined in the Pensions Act 2004 which came into force on
30 December 2005. This, together with documents issued by the Pensions Regulator and Technical
Actuarial Standards issued by the Financial Reporting Council, set out the framework for funding defined
benefit occupational pension schemes in the UK.

PRESENT VALUES OF PROVISION

RECONCILIATION OF OPENING AND CLOSING PROVISIONS

Period Ending Period Ending
30 September 30 September

2016 2015
(£000s) (£000s)
Provision at start of period 204 246
Unwinding of the discount factor (interest expense) 5 7
Deficit contribution paid (32) (25)
Remeasurements - impact of any change in assumptions 19 3
Remeasurements - amendments to the contribution schedule 132 Provision at end of period 355 231

INCOME AND EXPENDITURE IMPACT

Period Ending Period Ending
30 September 30 September

2016 2015
(£000s) (£000s)
Interest expense 5 ip
Remeasurements — impact of any change in assumptions 19 3
Remeasurements — amendments to the contribution schedule 132 Costs recognised in income and expenditure account (32) (25)

38

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

20. Pension (continued)
ASSUMPTIONS
30 September 30 September 30 September
2016 2015 2014
% per annum % per annum % per annum

Rate of discount 1.16 2.38 2.71

 

The discount rates shown above are the equivalent single discount rates which, when used to discount the
future recovery plan contributions due, would give the same results as using a full AA corporate bond yield
curve to discount the same recovery plan contributions.

DEFICIT CONTRIBUTIONS SCHEDULE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Year ending #0 Seo anne *° aoe *° _
(£000s) (£000s)

Year 1 39 26 a
Year 2 41 27 a6
Year 3 . 42 28 27
Year 4 43 29 ae
Year 5 36 30 ae
Year 6 37 22 30
Year 7 38 23 22
Year 8 32 23 Aa
Year 9 33 17 fs
Year 10 34 17 7
Year 11 - 18 at
Year 12 - # Me

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

20. Pension (continued)

The scheme is classified as a '‘last-man standing arrangement’. Therefore the company is potentially liable
for other participating employers’ obligations if those employers are unable to meet their share of the scheme
deficit following withdrawal from the scheme. Participating employers are legally required to meet their share
of the scheme deficit on an annuity purchase basis on withdrawal from the scheme.

A full actuarial valuation for the scheme was carried out with an effective date of 30 September 2014. This
actuarial valuation was certified on 23 November 2015 and showed assets of £3,123m, liabilities of £4,446m
and a deficit of £1,323m. To eliminate this funding shortfall, the trustees and the participating employers
have agreed that additional contributions will be paid, in combination from all employers, to the scheme as

follows:

Deficit contributions

Tier 1

From 1 April 2016 to 30 September 2020:

Tier 2

From 1 April 2016 to 30 September 2023:

Tier 3

From 1 April 2016 to 30 September 2026:

Tier 4

From 1 April 2016 to 30 September 2026:

£40.6m per annum
(payable monthly and increasing by 4.7% each year on 1%
April)

£28.6m per annum
(payable monthly and increasing by 4.7% each year on 1%
April)

£32.7m per annum
(payable monthly and increasing by 3.0% each year on 1%
April)

£31.7m per annum
(payable monthly and increasing by 3.0% each year on 1%
April)

Note that the scheme’s previous valuation was carried out with an effective date of 30 September 2011; this
valuation was certified on 17 December 2012 and showed assets of £2,062m, liabilities of £3,097m and a
deficit of £1,035m. To eliminate this funding shortfall, payments consisted of the Tier 1, 2 & 3 deficit

contributions.

Where the scheme is in deficit and where the company has agreed to a deficit funding arrangement, the
company recognises a liability for this obligation. The amount recognised is the net present value of the
deficit reduction contributions payable under the agreement that relates to the deficit. The present value is
calculated using the discount rate detailed in these disclosures. The unwinding of the discount rate is

recognised as a finance cost.

The Scheme is closed to new members and at the balance sheet date there was one active member of the
Scheme. Contributions of £15,405 (2015: £20,880) were made in the year, we expect to make contributions

of approximately £8,000 during the next financial year.

40

 

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

20. Pension (continued)
Pensions Trust’s Growth Plan

The company participates in the scheme, a multi-employer scheme which provides benefits to some
1,300 non-associated participating employers. The scheme is a defined benefit scheme in the UK. It is
not possible for the company to obtain sufficient information to enable it to account for the scheme as a
defined benefit scheme. Therefore it accounts for the scheme as a defined contribution scheme.

The scheme is subject to the funding legislation outlined in the Pensions Act 2004 which came into force on
30 December 2005. This, together with documents issued by the Pensions Regulator and Technical
Actuarial Standards issued by the Financial Reporting Council, set out the framework for funding defined
benefit occupational pension schemes in the UK.

The scheme is classified as a ‘last-man standing arrangement’. Therefore the company is potentially liable
for other participating employers' obligations if those employers are unable to meet their share of the scheme
deficit following withdrawal from the scheme. Participating employers are legally required to meet their share
of the scheme deficit on an annuity purchase basis on withdrawal from the scheme.

A full actuarial valuation for the scheme was carried out at 30 September 2011. This valuation showed
assets of £780m, liabilities of £928m and a deficit of £148m. To eliminate this funding shortfall, the Trustee
has asked the participating employers to pay additional contributions to the scheme as follows:

Deficit contributions

 

£13.9m per annum

Prem ‘Lape tae] Mansiabes (payable monthly and increasing by 3% each on ‘st April)

A full actuarial valuation for the scheme was carried out at 30 September 2014. This valuation showed
assets of £793m, liabilities of £970m and a deficit of £177m. To eliminate this funding shortfall, the Trustee
has asked the participating employers to pay additional contributions to the scheme as follows:

Deficit contributions

 

£12,945,440 per annum

From 1 April 2016 to 30 September 2026; (payable monthly and increasing by 3% each on ‘st April)

 

£54,560 per annum

Fram April 2016 tes0' September 2025: (payable monthly and increasing by 3% each on ‘st April)

 

The recovery plan contributions are allocated to each participating employer in line with their estimated share
of the Series 1 and Series 2 scheme liabilities.

Where the scheme is in deficit and where the company has agreed to a deficit funding arrangement the
company recognises a liability for this obligation. The amount recognised is the net present value of the
deficit reduction contributions payable under the agreement that relates to the deficit. The present value is
calculated using the discount rate detailed in these disclosures. The unwinding of the discount rate is
recognised as a finance cost.

41

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

20. Pension (continued)
PRESENT VALUES OF PROVISION
RECONCILIATION OF OPENING AND CLOSING PROVISIONS

Period Ending Period Ending
30 September 30 September

2016 2015
(£000s) (£000s)
Provision at start of period 87 94
Unwinding of the discount factor (interest expense) 2 2
Deficit contribution paid (12) (11)
Remeasurements - impact of any change in assumptions 5 1
Remeasurements - amendments to the contribution schedule 39 Provision at end of period 121 87

INCOME AND EXPENDITURE IMPACT

Period Ending Period Ending
30 September 30 September

2016 2015
(£000s) £000s)
Interest expense 2 2
Remeasurements — impact of any change in assumptions 5 1
Remeasurements — amendments to the contribution schedule 39 Costs recognised in income and expenditure account (12) (11)*

*includes defined contribution schemes and future service contributions (i.e. excluding any deficit reduction
payments) to defined benefit schemes which are treated as defined contribution schemes. To be completed
by the company.

 

ASSUMPTIONS
30 September 30 September 30 September
2016 2015 2014
% per annum % per annum % per annum
Rate of discount 1.15 2.18 2.53

 

The discount rates shown above are the equivalent single discount rates which, when used to discount the
future recovery plan contributions due, would give the same results as using a full AA corporate bond yield
curve to discount the same recovery plan contributions.

42

 

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

20. Pension (continued)

 

 

DEFICIT CONTRIBUTIONS SCHEDULE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Year ending 40 ema 3) aoe °° lal *° a rian
(£000s) (£000s)

Year 1 13 11 i
Year 2 13 12 i
Year 3 13 12 12
Year 4 14 12 ie
Year 5 14 13 12
Year 6 16 13 18
Year 7 15 14 13
Year 8 15 7 “
Year 9 16 : ?

 

43

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

20. Pension (continued)
Surrey County Council Pension scheme

The association makes payments as an Admitted Body to the Surrey County Council Pension Fund for
employees who were members of that scheme on 1* April 2008 under the terms of a TUPE transfer. This is
a funded defined benefit scheme that covers Surrey County Council employees and Scheduled and
Admitted Bodies under the Local Government Pension Scheme Regulations 1997.

The association has been notified by the Scheme Administrator that they are unable to satisfactorily identify
the association's share of the underlying Scheme assets and liabilities as at 30 September 2015 and
accordingly the pension costs are accounted for as defined contribution. The scheme administrator has
confirmed that the association has no liability for past service deficit contributions.

The total employer contribution payable in the year was £ 15,664 (2015: £15,956). At 30 September 2016
the association had 3 active members in the fund. Expected payments in the next financial year amount to
approximately £17,000.

21. Net cash inflow from operating activities

30 September 30 September

2016 2015
£ £
Operating surplus 1,244,439 1,209,836
Depreciation of tangible fixed assets 778,203 778,091
Grants released to income (387,821) (381,189)
1,634,821 4,606,738

Working capital movements
Debtors (658,254) 276,062
Creditors (34,715) (341,545)
Net cash inflow from operating activities 941,852 4,541,255

 

 

22. Reconciliation of net cash flow to movement in net debt
30 September 30 September

2016 2015

£ £

Increase in cash 4,893,444 9,741
Cash outflow/(inflow) from decrease /(increase) in debt 134,766 (377,184)
Change in net debt resulting from cash flows 5,028,210 (367,443)
Movement in net debt for the period 5,028,210 (367,443)
Net debt at 1 October (11,578,140) (11,210,697)
Net debt at 30 September (6,549,930) (11,578,140)

 

44

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

23. Analysis of changes in net debt

Cash at bank and in hand

Changes in cash

Loans

Changes in debt

Changes in net debt

24, Capital commitments

Capital expenditure

 

 

 

 

Expenditure contracted for but not provided in the accounts
Expenditure authorised by the board, but not contracted

Provisions for liabilities - other provisions

1 October 2015 Cashflow 30 Sept 2016
£ £ £

706,529 4,893,444 5,599,973
706,529 4,893,444 5,599,973
(12,284,669) 134,766 (12,149,903)
(12,284,669) 134,766 (12,149,903)
(11,578,140) 5,028,210 (6,549,930)
2016 2015

£ £

- 426,200

- 426,200

The leave pay provision represents holiday balances accrued as a result of services rendered in the
current period and which employees are entitled to carry forward. The provision is measured as the

salary cost payable for the period of absence.

25. Contingent assets/liabilities

The association receives capital grant from the Homes and Communities Agency, which is used to fund
the acquisition and development of housing properties and their components. In certain circumstances
upon disposal of grant funded properties the group is required to recycle this grant by crediting the

Recycled Capital Grant Fund.

The association had no other contingent assets or contingent liabilities at 30 September 2016 (2015: £nil).

45

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

26. Leasing commitments

Operating lease payments amounting to £613,282 (2015: £588,055) are due within one year. The leases
to which these amounts relate expire as follows:

2016 2015
£ £
Office equipment
Expiring in one year or less 1,805 4,805
Between 1-2 years 1,128 1,635
Between 2-3 years 756 1,128
Between 3-4 years - 756
Over 4 years - 3,689 5,324
Land and buildings
Expiring in one year or less - Between one and five years 387,074 377,914
Over five years 222,519 204,817
Total 613,282 588,055
27. Related parties
There are currently no beneficiary members of the directors.
28. Financial liabilities excluding trade creditors — interest rate risk profile

The association’s financial liabilities are sterling denominated. The interest rate profile of the association's
financial liabilities at 30 September was:

2016 2015

£ £

Floating rate 6,283,411 5,441,472
Fixed rate 5,866,492 6,843,197
Total (note 16) 12,149,903 12,284,669

 

The fixed rate financial liabilities have a weighted average interest rate of 3.71% (2015: 3.71%) and the
weighted average period for which it is fixed is 1 year to 24 years (2015: 1 year to 25 years).

The floating rate financial liabilities comprise loans that bear interest at rates based on the monthly
LIBOR.

46

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)

28. Financial liabilities excluding trade creditors — interest rate risk profile (continued)
The debt maturity profile is shown in note 19.
Borrowing facilities

The association has undrawn committed borrowing facilities. The facilities available at 30 September in
respect of which all conditions precedent had been met were as follows:

2016 2015

£ £

Expiring in less than one year 2,500,000 Expiring in 1-2 years - 2,500,000

2,500,000 2,500,000

Financial assets

Other than short term debtors, financial assets held are cash deposits in notice and current accounts.
They are sterling denominated and the interest rate profile at 30!" September was:

2016 2015

£ £

Floating rate on cash deposits 4,518,206 
Financial assets on which no interest is earned 1,081,767 706,529
Total “5,599,973 «706,529

29. Share Capital

The association is a company limited by guarantee and therefore has no share capital. Each member
(see numbers below) agrees to contribute £1 in the event of the company winding up.

2016 2015

No. No.

At 1 October 4 38
Joining during the year - 3
Leaving during the year - e
At 30 September 41 A4

47

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)
30. Transition to FRS 102

The association has adopted FRS 102 for the year ended 30 September 2016 and has restated the
comparative prior year amounts.

Changes for FRS 102 adoption

1. SHPS Pension
Under section 28 the group is now required to recognise the net present value of any
contractual agreements to make additional payments for a past deficit. Using a discount rate of
1.16% (2015 2.38%). This has resulted in a liability of £318,000 being recognised as a provision
in the opening reserves.

2. Holiday pay provision
A provision is now made for entitlement to holiday at the year-end which has not been taken by
employees. This has been calculated based on payroll records and totalled £17,219 as a liability
in opening reserves.

Holiday pay provision 2016 2015
£ £
At 18! October 17,219 Added in year - 17,219
Utilised - At 30! September 17,219 17,219
3. Grant accounting

Grants were previously netted off the cost of the related asset. Under FRS 102, government
grants must be accounted for using the accruals model or the performance model. As the
association accounts for its properties at cost, it has adopted the accruals model for
government grants, as required by SORP 2014. Non- government grants are accounted for
under the performance model.

Under the accruals model, the government grants have been allocated to the related assets
and amortised over the useful economic life of those assets. The unamortised amount is held
within deferred income, split between < 1 year and > 1 year. The amount of amortised grant
that has been recognised in opening reserves is £4,132,426.

Depreciation is now applied to the gross cost of housing assets, less land. This has led to an
additional depreciation charge of £4,263,561 that has been recognised in opening reserves.

48

 
ABILITY HOUSING ASSOCIATION
Report and Financial Statements

For the year ended 30 September 2016

 

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued)
30. Transition to FRS 102 (continued)

Restated association statement of financial position

Original Reserves

Holiday pay accrual

SHPS Pension

Amortisation of government grants

Depreciation adjustment
Correction of cumulative depreciation
Restated reserves

Restated surplus or deficit for the year ended 30 September 2015
Original surplus on ordinary activities before tax

SHPS Pension

Holiday pay accrual

Amortisation of grants

Depreciation adjustment

Restated surplus for the financial year

49

30 Sep 2015
£
12,885,125
(17,219)

(318,000)
381,189

(447,187)
(65,137)
12,418,771

1 Oct 2014
£
12,087,962

(340,000)
3,751,237
(3,816,374)

11,682,825

£
797,163
22,000
(17,219)
381,189
(447,187)
735,946

 
